# Contributing to the Crossplane CLI

Welcome to the Crossplane CLI, and thank you for your interest in contributing.

Please start by reading the [Crossplane contributing document]. The Crossplane
CLI follows the same guidelines and policies as the core Crossplane project,
including coding style. We also use a similar Nix-based development environment.

The CLI maintainers primarily communicate in the [#sig-cli] channel on Slack.

Topics specific to CLI development are covered below.

## The Command Tree

The Crossplane CLI's command tree follows a noun-first structure. This means all
top-level commands are nouns (`cluster`, `composition`, `dependency`) rather
than verbs (`get`, `list`, `generate`). New commands should be added under the
relevant noun, or a new noun if needed. Please feel free to ask on Slack or
propose a new command in an issue if you aren't sure where a new command should
go.

## kong

We use [kong] as our CLI framework. Each command is defined as a struct, in
which fields become subcommands, positional arguments, or flags. Kong's [struct
tags] can be used to control many behaviors, including validation,
auto-completion, and documentation.

## Command Maturity Levels

We have three maturity levels for commands:

- Generally Available (GA): Stable commands that will not be removed or have
  breaking changes made without considerable notice.
- Beta: Commands that are relatively stable and unlikely to be removed, but may
  have breaking changes made in a subsequent minor version.
- Alpha: Experimental commands that may change significantly or be removed at
  any time.

Alpha and beta commands are marked as such using a custom kong struct tag,
`maturity:"alpha"` or `maturity:"beta"`. These struct tags control two things:

1. Alpha commands are hidden from the help output by default. Users must enable
   showing alpha commands in their CLI configuration file.
2. Alpha and beta commands automatically have notes added to their help text
   indicating the maturity level and what it means.

If a command is not tagged with a maturity level, it will inherit from its
parent in the command tree. This means that if you're introducing a whole tree
of commands into beta, only the parent needs to be tagged. Commands without a
maturity level anywhere in their tree are considered GA.

Note that in the past alpha and beta commands were put under separate command
trees (`crossplane alpha` and `crossplane beta`). We have moved away from this
scheme in order to help keep the command tree and codebase more stable as
commands mature.

## Embedded Documentation

The CLI is self-documenting. Short descriptions for commands and flags should be
added using kong struct tags. Longer help should be returned by each command's
`Help()` method. This help should be formatted using markdown, which we render
in the console using the [glamour] library.

The `crossplane generate-docs` command is used to generate CLI reference
documentation for [docs.crossplane.io]. Markdown returned by each command's
`Help()` is embedded nearly verbatim into this documentation. Please observe the
following guidelines in order to make the docs look as good as possible:

- Don't put a top-level heading on your Markdown-formatted detailed help. An
  appropriate heading will be added automatically in both terminal usage and
  docs generation.
- Use level 2 headings (`##`) and below for sections in your help text. These
  will render correctly in the terminal, and be adjusted as needed by the
  `generate-docs` command to ensure the documentation page is properly
  structured.
- Use inline code and code blocks for commands, flags, arguments, etc. This
  looks good when rendered, and avoids spelling and grammar false positives.

If in doubt about whether your help will look good, you can easily check your
work by generating the docs locally:

```shell
# Clone the docs repository.
git clone https://github.com/crossplane/docs.git
cd docs

# Generate the docs.
crossplane generate-docs -o content/cli/master/command-reference.md

# Build the docs and serve them locally for preview.
hugo serve
```

### The `vale` Linter

The Crossplane documentation uses [vale] to enforce spelling and style
guidelines. This repository includes a CI check that generates documentation and
runs `vale` using the configuration from [crossplane/docs] to ensure that our
generated documentation does not trigger any warnings or errors.

It is sometimes unavoidable to have help text that triggers vale warnings or
errors. For example, the heading for the help section about the `crossplane
config` command includes the word "config" outside a code block, causing vale to
suggest that we replace it with "configuration". For these situations, it is
possible to temporarily disable specific vale rules in two ways:

1. If the problem is in detailed Markdown help, use [vale Markdown comments].
2. If the problem is in help generated by kong (command names, flag
   descriptions, etc.), use our custom `novale:"..."` kong tag. This will result
   in a Markdown comment of the form `<!-- vale ... = NO -->` being generated at
   the top of the relevant command's documentation section with a matching `=
   YES` comment at the bottom.

In both cases, please scope vale overrides as tightly as possible and ensure all
rules are re-enabled after the problematic section. Prefer to disable specific
matches rather than whole rules, and rules rather than whole styles.

<!-- Named links -->

[Crossplane contributing document]: https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/tree/main/contributing
[#sig-cli]: https://crossplane.slack.com/archives/C08V9PMLRQA
[kong]: https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/alecthomas/kong
[struct tags]: https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/alecthomas/kong#readme-supported-tags
[glamour]: https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/charmbracelet/glamour
[docs.crossplane.io]: https://docs.crossplane.io/latest/cli/command-reference/
[vale]: https://vale.sh
[vale Markdown comments]: https://vale.sh/docs/formats/markdown#comments
[crossplane/docs]: https://github.com/crossplane/docs
